1. Your incision is closed with staples and/or sutures. These will be removed in clinic 4-6 weeks after your surgery.

2. Keep your incision clean and dry. Do not apply creams, lotions, powders, or ointments to the incision. It is OK to shower and let water and soap run over the incision. Make sure to pat the area dry with a towel after showering. Avoid submerging or soaking your incision underwater for the next 4-6 weeks (avoid baths, pools, lakes, etc.).

3. Pain is expected after an amputation. Some pain is due to the incision and swelling after surgery, which usually resolves with time while healing. Phantom pain, or the sensation of the amputated foot still being there, can also occur. You have been prescribed pain medication, please take per the instructions on the label. If you continue experiencing severe pain or phantom pain after several weeks, please let your doctor know at your clinic visit to discuss options for managing this.

4. For patients with a below-knee amputation, it is important to continue using your knee immobilizer brace while laying in bed. This will prevent your leg from becoming frozen in a bent position at the knee (developing a contracture). Preventing contracture is important to maximize your ability to walk with a prosthetic once you have healed.

5. It is important to avoid falling after your amputation. Physical and occupational therapy will work with you to learn ways to walk around with a walker and transfer in and out of your bed/chair safely.

6. Do not drive or operate heavy machinery while taking narcotic (opioid) pain medication.

7. Please seek emergent medical attention if you begin experiencing sudden or severe chest pain, shortness of breath, dizziness, headache, numbness, weakness, or difficulty with speech.

8. Please contact our clinic (713-791-1414 ext. 23232) or seek urgent medical attention if you notice your incision developing redness, increased pain and swelling, significant bleeding, and/or foul-smelling fluid drainage.

9. Once your incision has completely healed, you will begin to see a Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation doctor and their team for additional physical therapy and preparation for a prosthetic limb. This will include self-massaging your incisional scar and beginning to wear a “shrinker”. Once you have been fitted for a prosthesis, you will be given further instructions on taking care of your amputation stump. You can call the main hospital number (713-791-1414), then extension 22-7168 to reach the front desk of the Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation clinic.

[courtesy of Ian Cook-Armstrong, M.D.]


Additional (non-VA) Support for Houston-Area Amputees

 
Houston Amputee Alliance
(832) 658-5500
Email kristin.reeves@memorialhermann.org
 
Amputees in Action of Houston
(713)747-7647
Email info@tmcortho.com
 
H.E.L.P. Amputee Support Group
(713) 429-3707
Website  http://www.helpforamputees.org/
Email helpforamputees@gmail.com
 
DRIVE Disability Resources for Information Vocation and Education
(713) 799-6945
Email kristin.reeves@memorialhermann.org




